happen on England stop you there
mid-sentence here's grant chaps good
afternoon and welcome to today's Downing
Street press conference I'm pleased to
be joined today by Professor Jonathan
van tan let me start by updating you on
the latest information from the
government's Cobra data file I can
report through the government's
monitoring and testing program as of
today one million seven hundred and
twenty eight thousand four hundred and
forty three tests for coronavirus have
now been carried out in the UK including
96 thousand eight hundred and seventy
eight tests yesterday two hundred and
fifteen thousand two hundred and sixty
people have been tested positive that's
an increase of three thousand eight
hundred and ninety six cases since
yesterday eleven thousand eight hundred
and nine people are currently in
hospital with coronavirus in the UK down
from twelve thousand two hundred and
eighty four yesterday and 17 percent
down since the last day last week same
day last week and tragically thirty one
thousand five hundred and eighty seven
people have now died that's an increase
of three hundred and forty six
fatalities in all settings since
yesterday these deaths are devastating
for the families friends victims and our
thoughts and our prayers are with all of
them every day
they also strengthen our resolve to
fight the pandemic with all the
resources we can muster in the weeks
ahead tomorrow the Prime Minister set
out a road map for the next phase in our
strategy to tackle current virus in
support of this today I'm setting out an
ambitious programme to help prepare our
transport network for the critical role
it will play as we emerge from this
crisis importantly it is true to say
that moving beyond kovat will be a
gradual process not a single leap to
freedom so when we do emerge the world
will seem quite different at least for
some time the need to maintain social
distancing means that our public
transport system cannot go back to where
it left off and here is a very stark
fact even with public transport
reverting to a full service once you
take into account the two metered social
distancing rule there would only be
effective capacity for one in ten
passengers in many parts of our network
just a tenth of the old capacity so
getting Britain moving again
while not overcrowding our transport
network is going to require many of us
to think very carefully about how and
when we travel we've accomplished so
much over the past seven weeks of this
lockdown the whole country has been
responsible for reducing kovat
reproduction or the r8 millions of
households across the UK have changed
their behavior for the greater good
getting Britain moving again whilst not
overcrowding our transport network
represents an another another enormous
logistical challenge yes this is a
problem which presents a health
opportunity - an opportunity to make
lasting changes that could not only make
us fitter but also better off both
mentally and physically
in the long run during the crisis
millions of people millions of people
have discovered the benefits of active
travel by cycling or walking many have
been able to appreciate this remarkably
warm summer that sorry spring whilst
sticking to the guidelines in some
places there's been a 70 percent rise in
the number of people on bikes whether
that's for exercise or all necessary
journeys like stocking up on food so
whilst it's crucial that we stay at home
when the country does get back to work
we need to ask those people to carry on
cycling walking and for them to be
joined by many other as well otherwise
with public transport capacity severely
restricted more cars could be drawn to
the roads or towns and cities and they
would quickly become gridlocked we also
know that in this new world pedestrians
will need more space so today I'm
announcing a 2 billion pound package to
put cycling and walking at the heart of
a transport policy to set out how we
deliver this will
for a National Cycling plan for
publication in early June in line with
the statute recycle and walking
investment strategy to help double
cycling and increase walking by 2025 the
first stage worth 250 million pounds is
a series of swift emergency
interventions to make cycling and
walking safer pop-up bike lanes wider
pavements cycle and bus only streets all
examples of what people will start to
see more off accompanying the new money
where are we are today publishing
fast-track statutory guidance effective
immediately requiring councils in
England to cater for significantly
increased numbers of cyclists and
pedestrians are making it easier for
them to create safer C streets for
employees who want to start to cycle to
work but don't have a bike right now the
popular cycle to work scheme already
allows employees to say between 25 and
39 percent of the cost of a new bike or
indeed electric bike there's been a huge
increase in people using this scheme and
will work with employers to increase
uptake even further and for those who
may have an old bike perhaps in the shed
and want to get it back to a work
roadworthy condition there'll be a
voucher scheme for bike repairs and for
maintenance plans are also being
developed to boost bike fixing
facilities across the country
what's more over the next few months
we'll set out further measures to make a
once-in-a-generation change to the way
that people travel in Britain
this will include tough new standards
for cycling infrastructure a new
national cycling champion to inspire us
much closer links to the NHS with GPS
prescribing cycling to help get us
fitter legal changes to protect Bumble
road users at least one zero-emission
city with its centre restricted to bikes
and electric vehicles only and the
creation of long-term cycle program and
budget just like we have already for our
roads there's clear evidence not least
from the time that the Prime Minister
was Mayor of London that making the
streets safe for walking and cycling is
good for retailers good for business and
very healthy
the economy and in making these changes
our national recovery can also become a
green recovery as a result one of the
few positive benefits of this crisis is
drastically better air quality the
health benefits that that brings more
than 20,000 extra deaths a year in the
UK are attributed to nitrogen dioxide
emissions we want to try to preserve
this cleaner air
so today I'm also fast tracking trials
of East scooters bringing this program
already underway from next year forward
to next month and extending those trials
to fall from four local authorities to
every region in the country that wants
them in a bid to get a scooter rental
schemes up and running in cities as fast
as possible helping reduce car use on
shorter journeys and staking taking some
of the pressure off the buses at this
vital time these trials will help us
assess the safety benefits together with
their impact on public spaces now we
know that the car industry has of course
been very badly hit during this crisis
but April's new sales figures showed us
that for the first time ever that the
two biggest selling models were both
electric vehicles so to keep this quiet
clean car revolution going
I can also announce today ten million
pounds of additional support for car
charging points on our streets the car
will remain the mainstay for many
families as well as as backing the
electric infrastructure therefore we're
also going to accelerate the filling of
potholes that plague so many road users
in all the forms and just as new
technology has changed in the vehicles
we use so digital technology will help
us to be more informed about the choices
we make to battle against kovat at a
time when transport demand could quickly
become overwhelmed the capacity not
being there and there we need urgent
access to real-time travel information
it is crucial that we take advantage of
the UK's digital expertise therefore
with the right mobile apps people can
find out which parts of the transport
network are overcrowded and avoid them
they can choose alternative travel
options to help maintain safe distancing
or they can get information to help
stagger their journeys and lift the
burden on public transport at peak times
so this week I chaired a roundtable with
key players like Google Microsoft and
British firm city mapper to develop both
data and apps to help the public view
crowding across the transport network
and in real-time this two billion pound
announcement represents the most
significant package of cycling walking
in green travel by any British
government clearly it will never be
possible to cycle walk or even a scooter
everywhere cars will remain an
absolutely vital form of transport to
many and so in the coming days oh and as
we look to the future that we've further
announcements about the huge investments
were making in roads and in rail taking
advantage of the low usership during
this kovat crisis finally as we begin
the process of preparing public
transport to get Britain moving again no
one should underestimate the sheer scale
of the challenge ahead even with every
train bust and triumph fully restored to
service this will not be enough social
distancing measures mean that everyone
who travels will need to contribute to
meeting this capacity challenge changing
our behavior is the single biggest thing
that's beaten back this virus the
Welcome fool we've seen deaths is not
only achievement of the doctors and
nurses and care workers but everyone in
the country for following the stay at
home guidance to reiterate nothing I'm
saying today changes these basic rules
but as we contemplate the future we will
have to carry on making changes
particularly after we leave our homes
preventing overcrowding which could lead
to a second spike and more deaths will
be the responsibility of each and every
one of us so please only travel when you
need to be considerate to others and
help prioritize essential workers and
let's all play our part in ensuring that
we're able to get Britain moving safely
again when that time comes I'd like to
now turn to Professor John from
thank you and good afternoon I'm going
to do the daily slide update now so to
remind you all again that our five tests
for adjusting the lockdown our NHS
capacity a falling number of daily
deaths reliable data showing us that
infections are decreasing getting
testing and PPE
supply in exactly the right place and
being absolutely sure that we have the
room to maneuver in such a way that we
do not risk a second peak of infections
that threatens the NHS those are and
remain our five key points next slide
please
now on this slide which shows Transport
use in Great Britain since the lockdown
started on the 23rd of March until a
couple of days ago you can see that the
British people have continued to be
remarkable in showing enormous restraint
in terms of travel the figures for buses
for tubes and for national rail are
extremely impressive if you look at the
motor vehicle trend this larger blue
line at the top of the graph you can see
that there is a gradual increase over
time the trend is up and this may
reflect that some people are now
returning to work who made the decision
to stop at the beginning of lockdown but
but perhaps never obligated by the
guidance to actually stop so it's a
difficult trend to interpret but it is
it is slightly upwards next slide please
now this slide shows daily tests from
6th of April to the 9th of May and it is
tests completed and sent out and you can
see that we are now really at a high
plateau in the region of a hundred
thousand tests per day there is some
fluctuation
quite frankly I expect there to be some
fluctuation on a day to day basis so I
don't think we can read too much into
individual day to day variations but the
macro picture is that this is now at a
much much higher level than it ever was
at the beginning of this crisis next
slide please
on new cases you can see the growing
contribution of the pillar to testing
arm math swab testing by universities
research institutes and companies
supplementing the blue columns NHS swab
testing and you can see still that we
are encountering several thousand new
cases per day now this these data are
difficult to interpret because of course
if you compare our testing capacity at
the beginning of this pandemic to where
we are now we have so much more capacity
now and that will be reflected in our
ability to detect more cases so
interpret the data here with a degree of
care please next slide please
this slide is familiar to you again use
you've seen it many times before it is
the number of people in hospital with
corona virus in the UK and you can see
now that broadly nationwide there is a
solid decline right across the different
regions I am confident that our is less
than one overall that still means that
we have to be very cautious and careful
and measured about what happens next
next slide please if you look at
critical care beds and the occupancy you
can see that across the Four Nations we
have plenty of capacity for managing
critic patients who require critical
care and the proportion of those beds
occupied by coronavirus patients can
used to decline next slide please
on deaths you can see really since the
middle of April that there has been and
there continues to be a steady and
consistent fall in the number of
recorded deaths due to Cove in nineteen
in the UK next slide please
and then finally this is the global
death comparison that you have seen
before all lines begin on the bottom
left-hand corner at a point when 50
cumulative deaths were recorded in each
of the countries and it continues to
tell the story that I have illustrated
to you in previous press conferences
that the United States is an outlier at
the top that the UK is in company with
France Spain and Italy in the middle
band and there are other European
countries and South Korea along the
lower trajectory these data are always
difficult to interpret every time I want
to say it that we will not get the most
granular picture until we start to get
excess mortality data across all of
these countries and that will help us
make a far more accurate comparison
Thank You secretary - Jonathan thank you
very much and I want to go to the first
question is a member of public Stephen
from County doc good afternoon I live in
the northeast of England 175 miles away
from Edinburgh and double that distance
from London should I follow the advice
of the First Minister for Scotland or
that of Downing Street thank you thank
you very much and Stephen well the
answer is actually I think the the Four
Nations Scotland and Wales Northern
Ireland and England have a tea largely
moved in lockstep you'll hear from the
Prime Minister tomorrow night at 7 p.m.
and we do want to of course make this as
straightforward as people as indeed this
message in front of me has been all the
way through to stay home
protect the NHS and save lives and so
the next phase of this will also involve
some very clear messaging and you won't
have to wait very long to hear it either
so thank you very much
Steven turning to Tammy from Bristol
links a written question
Tammy asks opening schools and colleges
is a very important topic for many
people but how do you plan to implement
social distancing rules and education
settings children especially primary age
and younger will find it difficult to
keep these rules was very good point of
course again to repeat the first point
is we need to wait to hear from the
Prime Minister tomorrow night but the
wider point is of course there are
ongoing discussions between my
colleagues in education and schools
teachers and the unions and of course
with our scientists as well to work out
the best way to bring schools back when
that happens
but Jonathan perhaps I can ask you to
come yes and so the point the that the
Tammy is making is that young children
are do find it difficult to keep rules
any kind of touching or distancing rules
and that's an accepted fact we've we've
all encountered young children and we
can completely understand that what I
can say is that whatever the Prime
Minister announces that we will do next
it is going to be extremely cautious and
extremely careful and extremely
painstaking and it has to take into
account the kind of factors that have
been mentioned in the question and
indeed that that advice and that policy
will do that but it's caution all the
way really I think that's absolutely
right in answer to Tammy extreme caution
is actually the watchword on this and
we've seen in other countries
we're second not quite spikes have come
along but where social distancing has
been relaxed and there been problems so
we will wait to see can I turn now to
been right at the BBC Thank You
Secretary of State can you confirm that
anyone flying into UK airports will be
told to quarantine for 14 days from the
start of next
a lot of people will wonder why this
wasn't done weeks ago during the peak of
the pandemic and won't such a move
damage the aviation industry even more
thank you very much Ben we'll look and
throughout this crisis in particular at
the beginning and particularly reference
to that question we've saw them taken
medical advice in fact I remember asking
the chief medical adviser exactly about
this point the thing is that very few
people are traveling by comparison to
normal and particularly at the beginning
of this crisis most of them were Brits
returning from abroad possibly ranging
in numbers of about 3 million in that
time others would be permanent residents
here and of course essential workers who
are providing fixes for phrase and
supply and medical equipment who would
need to and want to have traveling so
the medical advice didn't support it but
I think it's worth pointing out we did
in fact close off quarantine anyone from
Rohan in January from Iran northern
Italy and South Korea in February which
people may have not have realized at the
time but now we have a situation where
as we get the honor but the reproduction
number down in the UK and we begin to
get things under control
and we now have the capacity as we just
discussed in testing as well it clearly
then makes sense to look at what happens
at the borders I can't confirm is the
answer we'll have to wait for the Prime
Minister tomorrow night then but it does
mean that the capacity to do those
things is this but also that the science
would back it as well I'm just going to
ask Jonathan van tan to comment on the
science of it as well yes I'll just
going to comment on the science of
quarantine and leave the announcements
for later the incubation period of this
disease is very clearly understood to be
between 1 and 14 days that is to say
from the point of a critical exposure to
the virus
you remain well for from one day to 14
days before your symptoms emerge and
typically the mean incubation period is
5 days so that will be a typical wait if
you like between when you are exposed
and you became in fact
did through to when you get symptoms if
people go home as we asked them to do
when they return from Wuhan at the end
of January and they stay in their own
homes for 14 days even if they were
infected very shortly before they came
into the UK then they work out that
incubation period at home and they do
not spread the virus onwards into the
community so that's the scientific basis
of how quarantine would work in this
circumstance thank you very much
Jonathan I would add Ben but I'll come
back to you I think having bearing in
mind the sacrifice the British people
have made this last seven weeks and
Counting we can't have a situation where
everyone else is being a pass to stay at
home but others who have come into the
into the country it's also worth
pointing out that the numbers coming to
the country are very very small but it
is a question of that judgment then can
I go back to you yeah just on the sort
of the clarity of the message on the one
hand you're now talking about quarantine
people which is a tightening of
restrictions on the other hand saying to
people they can now go and visit garden
centres which is a loosening of the
lockdown rules I just wonder if the
government's messaging strategy isn't
now looking more confused no I think
that most people are more than sort of
capable of understanding what's meant
and there's the first secretary said
when he announced the five principles of
the NHS coping making sure that deaths
are consistently falling making sure the
our rate is falling that we have the
capacity for the tests the most
important of all that we don't then have
another spike when we change social
distancing and he said at that time
there will be some places where we will
wish to tighten there'll be other places
of course where social distancing or our
habits or the message may change or
loosen so I think it's completely
consistent with the plan but as I say
you will have to wait till we actually
have formal announcements on any of this
either before any of that confirmed
thank you very much and maybe I could
add just that as I understand it the
policy is actually still quite
consistent we've announced
testing and tracing that will roll out
in due course and that will mean that we
identify cases and we ask context to go
into home isolation for 14 days just the
same as would apply if somebody crossed
our border so from that perspective I
think there is a real consistency here
and the difference you're hinting at is
a kind of blunderbuss approach of it
applies to everybody
versus hopefully a more filtered way of
doing exactly the same thing then thank
you very much indeed can we turn to a
cold innit from ITV Thank You Secretary
of State the airlines and the airline
industry fear that they won't have an
industry left if this locked on and
these quarantine arrangements continue
for any great length of time can you
confirm whether you're still open to
negotiation on this quarantine
arrangement with the airlines and the
industry or have you made up your mind I
say nothing has been announced at all
this yes in fact and we will have to
wait for those announcements but I just
want to say with regard to the aviation
sector because you're absolutely right
when it comes to if you think about
sectors that have been affected
obviously leisure entertainment those
are the things an aviation would be
right up there with them and it's both
the short-term problem people aren't
flying now and a longer-term recovery
issue for them it's worth just recalling
that the Chancellor has made some very
very important packages available not
just furloughing of staff but also the
loans that have been made available but
actually also in addition to that the
Chancellor and I have approached the
entire aviation sector and said look if
those things don't work that doesn't fit
the bill than for this sector because we
recognize what's happening you can get
into bespoke conversations and that is
happening in a number of different
aviation cases but I mean it is
undeniably the case of course the
aviation has been right at the forefront
of this we have to first and foremost
make sure that we develop policy in the
public interest and that of course as
everybody knows is protecting the image
and saving lives you want to come back
on that car I wanted to ask about your
announcement on cycling actually the
extra investment in cycling would be
very welcome for those who are able to
cycle to work but as you will know the
average commute in this country is
nearly nine miles there are many people
who just can't cycle to work even if
they want to and you've admitted that
all the transport public transport
capacity won't be enough if it's brought
back online what are you doing about
that
yeah I mean you raise an excellent point
and I hope that in my comments I covered
it a little bit and saying that I'm
going to come back and talk about the
infrastructure investment on roads and
so on and so forth absolutely recognized
that car will be a vital part of what's
required but I do just want to kind of
pick you up on once that outside of
London it's been shown that half of
journeys are under three miles so you
don't have to be a cyclist to benefit
from society as a whole
switching to cycling and walking so to
give you an idea of what that meant if
only 5% of those journeys were cycling
so if I could cycling increased by 5% I
should say it would mean eight million
fewer car journeys nine million fewer
rail journeys and 13 million fewer bus
journeys and that's just a 5% increase
in cycling so you don't have to be the
cyclist to benefit from that and that's
why I was saying in my comments I very
much like people to be thinking about
alternative and active forms of
transport today in order to protect the
total amount of public transport that
will be available once you include
social distancing within it Carly can
come back to you if you wanted to
respond well that still doesn't quite
answer the question about public
transport capacity which is you've
indicated is going to be a very very
serious problem especially in the
southeast of England of course but
around the country yeah so there is no
simple answer tonight look I'm here to
sort of just give it to you straight
there is no simple answer if you that if
you think about the figure of only space
for one in ten commuters if you keep
social distancing which of course we
must and professor van Town will tell us
why
then it does restrict space which is why
I'm here today providing some notice
that it's very important that we all
think about how we get about when you
think about that figure of you know
almost half of journeys being just three
miles it's quite clear that there are
the ways that people could travel quite
a bit of the time and even if you're not
a cyclist or a walker it would help the
whole of society thank you very much
indeed can I turn to Ben Kentish from
LBC in afternoon thank-yous
transport secretary given the quarantine
arrangements we've been talking about
and the other uncertainty about travel
can you level with people today and
given the uncertainty facing the tourism
and tourism industry and individuals say
to people that realistically foreign
travel this summer is going to be highly
unlikely and would you advise people
even now to start canceling trips and
just secondly if I made to Professor van
tan it's become clear has been for some
weeks now that the driving force of this
epidemic is now really transmission
within care homes I just wanted to ask
why has it been so difficult to protect
some of the most vulnerable people in
our society those at highest risk from
this disease ie people in care homes and
what more if anything do you think needs
to be done to achieve that thank you
thank you very much Ben look on summer
holidays it is a fact at the moment
unfortunately that the vise hasn't
changed we have to stay at homes you
can't travel around this country at the
minute advice we have to wait to see if
it's updated in terms of international
travel of course the Foreign
Commonwealth office is recommending
advising strongly against all travel
internationally at the moment and people
will of course have to have that in
their minds before they're able to book
anything of course also in countries
where people might normally go to visit
they're also not accepting people in in
many cases and so it's difficult to give
blanket advice the situation is as it is
at the moment and we will have to see
how the reproductive rate of kovat 19
continues to proceed before we'll know
the answer from here standing here at
the beginning of May to know how that
will look
in the summer and on care homes that was
too
yes thank you for the question that I
recognize that there has and continues
to be a difficult situation
in care homes and I'm extremely sorry
for the many deaths that have occurred
however care homes are a really
difficult situation from a basic
infection control and epidemiology point
of view first of all here we are dealing
with a virus that is very infectious the
R nought if left unchecked is somewhere
between 2.8 and 3 it's high we are
dealing with care homes with a largely
indoor environment and we do know that
this and many other respiratory viruses
spreads more easily in indoor
environments we are also dealing with by
and large a very elderly population in
care homes and my colleagues who run the
cosine analysis are very clear that
there is a an independent effect of age
on the risks of kovat and the severity
and the death rate and that is now very
very clear indeed and roughly with each
10 year age band it goes up and up and
on top of being elderly many of the
people living in care homes have other
underlying conditions and again the
analyses are very clear that you have
increased risk of complicated disease
increased risks of death again
associated with a range of underlying
conditions so you almost have the
perfect storm of a really nasty virus
that's infectious a very elderly
population and we know age increases
risk a population with many underlying
illnesses risk conditions that again
further increase risk and to an extent
an indoor environment so it's just of
a challenging place place to work in now
in terms of what is being done about it
my colleagues at NHS England and the
Care Quality Commission are now really
putting an enormous amount of effort
into solving these problems and giving
as much advice and support as they
physically can Jonathan thank you very
much Ben thank you as well
turning now to Nigel Nelson Sunday
Mirror yes Thank You Secretary of State
it's a follow-up to Tammy's question
would you accept that parents won't be
able to cycle into work until schools
are fully up and running and also to
Jonathan van Tam what's going to happen
to the 1.8 million shielding when the
volunteers they rely on also go back to
work
Nigel thanks very much I mean I think
you rightly point out the
interconnectivity of our economy and
also this enormous and unprecedented
situation we find ourselves in I think
it's true to say that people have
through this crisis have found a lot of
different ways of working and many more
people than ever thought it was possible
have discovered they've been able to
work from home and I imagine that quite
a lot of that will continue and possibly
for quite some time particularly as
social distancing remains at the heart
of making sure that we proceed with
extreme caution
which is absolutely our desire so look
it of course it is the case that all of
these things have to fit together they
have to fit together in a certain pace
the schools going back work going back
and so on and so forth and it is why if
I may say the Prime Minister will be
speaking to us at 7 p.m. tomorrow night
to set out how that road map will fit
together in the medium-term
and to your second point so thank you
for the question and shielding is an
extremely important part of what we've
been doing to protect the most
vulnerable in our society during the
first part of this pandemic I believe
it's likely to have had a maid
effect on the number of severe cases in
the shielded population
I believe it's likely to present
prevented many deaths in that population
we do keep the shielded groups under
review and we do keep how we are going
to move forwards with the shielding
policy under review but I can tell you
that nothing we will do in the future
will ever sacrifice the Public Health
and Clinical importance of continuing to
protect the most vulnerable people in
our society Jonathan thanks Nigel did
you want to come back I only just just
to check the order of events which is
what I was trying to ask about that
without schools wrap around child care
Breakfast Club school clubs then the
whole idea have started to talk about
people going back to work is a bit
premature and so I just tried to see if
you if you would agree that schools are
the priority before we can do the next
day in a sense I'm trying to actually
raise this subject ahead of time Nigel
because as I described in my comments I
think it's very important that people
are starting to think about the reality
of how journeys may need to work in the
future so you're right to say that this
is sort of projecting forward rather
than something which is right now at
this moment but be as I say if I can
just you know appeal to your patience
for just over 24 hours to hear from the
Prime Minister tomorrow I feel there
would be in a much happier position
about how that all fits together as he
presents us with that roadmap can I turn
now to Toby help from the observer hello
question first of all former secretary
of state last week a number of media
outlets including the BBC were
confidently asserting that the
government would drop its stay at home
message when the prime minister makes
his announcement tomorrow more recently
and since then there's been a much
stronger of evidence on how cautious the
government wants to be which would
suggest perhaps that it's not gonna drop
upstair home
and we're in the middle of a bank
holiday weekend very sunny weather I
know you'll try and save the Prime
Minister miss wake the Prime Minister
statement tomorrow but there's more than
24 hours to go and a lot of people will
be wanting to get out into the parks and
to have a good time and from my own
straw polls I've heard a lot of people
say already that they think the lockdown
basically is going so they might go out
could you tell people before tomorrow
and they have to make the decision what
to do should they be staying at home or
should they not instead Toby is it's
just absolutely unequivocal people
should stay at home please follow the
guidance it's it's still written here
that hasn't changed and it's vital that
we don't throw away essentially the
great work of seven weeks of people
respecting very impressively the the
rules and the guidelines by throwing it
away because it happens to be sunny
outside this weekend that would be
absolutely tragic and when as we hear
the Prime Minister and I'll have tried
to suggest in in my comments earlier
that does change we will have to proceed
with an unbelievable degree of caution
we will not be able to simply go back to
business as usual or transport as usual
in my case so your point is very well
made and the answer is simple please
stay at home this weekend in exactly the
usual way that you have been previously
okay could I just fire one extra passive
and town as well we've talked to lots of
scientists who confidently said that in
order for the government's
trap-and-trace system to be effective
and in fact for it to operate really at
all the numbers of new infections have
got to have come down into their
hundreds now they seem to be hovering
around 4,000 at the moment do you agree
with those scientists that for the track
and trace to really work we have to have
new cases of Kovach 19 down in the
hundreds and if so how long do you think
that will take
okay so a test and trace is going to be
a system that involves the NHS app and
it is also going to involve public
health England in wider traditional
contract tracing using telephones foot
leather epidemiology and the way it's
always been done
for many years now those two together
make a package of tests and trace and we
have been very clear that test and trace
on its own is part of the solution to
how we continue to live with this virus
after the lockdown that we're in at the
moment it's not the total solution and
how how trying to get this right
how extensive the test and tracing needs
to be clearly depends upon the level of
disease in the population but it is
entirely appropriate to see it as part
of the overall measures that will give
us more flexibility in more room on what
we can do in the social distancing space
to ease things but on its own it's a
contribution it is not a total solution
thank you very much Toby I can also tell
you I know that the trials and the Isle
of Wight of that tracking the NHS X app
designed to help assist people is going
well our people have been downloaded it
enthusiastically and I know that the
plan is later in the month to make it
more widely available as well can I turn
to
Shila Sri Lanka from Easter night Thank
You Secretary of State the latest
earnest figures show that members of the
black South Asian communities are dying
in significantly high numbers from the
coronavirus most live in extended
families narky workers the government
inquiry will report at the end of the
month in the interim what practical
steps as the government undertaken to
protect South Asian keyword
and their families secondly if I'm a
secondly one more question please
secondly we know from our sister
publications Asian trader and pharmacy
business that over 75% of all
convenience stores and 50% of community
pharmacies nationally around by the
Asian community we know pharmacists are
key workers but will the government
consider including convenience retailers
as key workers and provide them and
pharmacists with good quality PPE so
they can continue to serve the nation or
as some of our readers have suggested
with the government rather see
convenience stores and community
policies closed so they could stay alive
thank you very much indeed Charlotte um
look I think you were very concerned
about deaths amongst minority
communities the South Asian community
included and we're very very interested
to understand why that is happening and
at the moment we're unclear whether that
is just the proximity in other words
that more people from minority
backgrounds happen to work in health and
social care or whether there's something
else going on actually opens up wider
questions as well beyond this of you
know why it is that men are much more
likely to have higher mortality rates or
obesity seems to be a fact from many
other things besides so we have asked
professor Fenton from the public health
England to look into this and carry out
a quick study results as you mentioned
will be at the end of May and I think
we'll be in a much better position to
understand this better but being no
doubt at all we are absolutely
determined to get to the sets or to a
proper understanding of what has been
going on there and in relation to your
second point about ownership of whether
that's stores or pharmacies look I think
everybody on the front line are key
workers they are keeping this country
running at this incredibly difficult
time and it applies to people in many
different sexes but you've mentioned to
which you know first amongst equals and
of course we want to get the right
protection for people in different
settings we know that in a health
setting the PPE required is of a
different level it might be best for me
to therefore as of medical
I should ask Jonathan to comment on us
yes sir thank you Thank You secretary
today I'll pick up on the question of
black and minority ethnic groups in the
ONS report thank you for the question
I've read that report I take it very
seriously indeed
and there is an enormous determination
across the medical advisory function for
the government to get to the bottom of
this and get to the bottom of it with
real clarity and that's why I don't want
to come on here today and offer you kind
of silly quick fixes this is a complex
mixture of risk by age risk by gender
risk by comorbidities other illnesses
there is an obesity signal beginning to
emerge as well and on top of that and
I'm absolutely clear there is a signal
around black and minority ethnic groups
no one I think is trying to brush that
under the carpet or say it's not there
but it is complicated and to give you
some idea of that complexity right now I
can't stand in front of you and say that
I could easily make a and on the hoof
judgment about who is more at risk a
somebody from the black and minority
ethnic community who is spelt age 50 a
regular half marathon runner eats well
does everything right versus somebody
who is from a white ethnic group who is
32 who is extremely overweight doesn't
exercise has diabetes has asthma etc etc
those are just silly examples but
they're ones that I hope give you an
understanding that pitching the risk for
individuals is quite a difficult and
technically involved thing to do and
that's why I don't want to make any
you know quick jumps and quick quips of
answers to you I'd rather say to you
that we are taking this incredibly
seriously and we are determined to get
to the bottom of it in a proper and
scientific way it shows I just want to
be absolutely backup well Johnson said
we absolutely will be led by the science
on this find out what's going wrong and
we owe it to everybody who's put
themselves on the frontlines
to find out exactly what's happened do
you want to come back in yes thank you
we appreciate that it's a usually
complex issue and given that the inquiry
was first announced on the 16th of April
it's going to announce now its findings
at the end of May
people actually dying now there's a
great deal of anxiety within glioma
communities and all they're asking for
is practical advice practical steps as
to what the government's doing to
protect these lights there's a huge
amount of anxiety yes indeed and look we
need to get to the facts to understand
this but I think the the advice would
actually be the same as the advice all
round washing hands making sure that
appropriate PPE to go into your second
question in the right circumstances is
is Warren and as I say bluntly finding
out what is actually going on and that
is a very rapid piece of work that's
going on and I'm sure we'll be hearing
from Professor Fenton the moment he can
bring some clarity to exactly what has
happened everything else you don't add
to that I just can't tell you how urgent
it is but I can also tell you it's not
so urgent that we want to make mistakes
and we want to be very very clear about
the science with you thank you very much
indeed
and I just wanted to just finish by
saying I talked a lot about the future
this afternoon and some of the measures
have come into place but please this
advice hasn't changed wait for the Prime
Minister tomorrow night sellout the
roadmap going forward what I would ask
you to do regardless to think about the
future about alternative and active
means of transport but we will be
proceeding with extreme caution
maintaining social distancing as one of
the absolute key ways to beat this virus
in order that we can get Britain moving
again thank you very much indeed thank
you see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC news live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder
UK forward slash news follow the story
for all the latest with BBC News